---
layout: page
title: Problem 5
mathjax: true
tags: [euler]
---

<h3 style="color: #8f5536; text-align: center">Smallest multiple</h3>

> <small><span style="font-size: 1rem; color: #90a959">2520 is the smallest number that can be divided by each of the numbers from 1 to 10 without any remainder.<br>
> What is the smallest positive number that is evenly divisible by all of the numbers from 1 to 20?</span><br><br>
> <cite>[https://projecteuler.net/problem=5](https://projecteuler.net/problem=5)</cite></small>
{: style="background-color: #2d2d2d"}

#### Deduce

The smallest multiple of a group of numbers can be found by getting prime factors of the numbers and multiplying together each prime factor to its highest degree.

The smallest multiple, or `lowest common multiple` or `lcm`, of 2, 4, 6, 7, and 9 can be found by factoring each number:

$$\begin{align*}
2 & : 1^1 \times 2^1 \\

4 & : 1^1 \times 2^2 \\

6 & : 1^1 \times 2^1 \times 3^1 \\

7 & : 1^1 \times 7^1 \\

9 & : 1^1 \times 3^2
\end{align*}$$

For this group of numbers there are 4 unique prime factors.

$$\begin{align*}
\text {FACTORS} & : \text {DEGREES} \\
1 & : 1 \\

2 & : 1, 2 \\

3 & : 1, 2 \\

7 & : 1
\end{align*}$$

The `lcm` for $$\{2, 4, 6, 7, 9\}$$ is $$1^1 \times 2^2 \times 3^2 \times 7^1 = 252$$.

We will reuse our [`primes generator`](/euler/solved/003/#prime-generator) for problem 3.

#### Factors

{% highlight Javascript %}
var Factor = (function(n) {
  function factor(n) {
    var primes = Primes.primesTo(Math.floor(Math.sqrt(n))),
        factors = Object.create(null),
        i = primes.length;
    factors[1] = 1;
    while(i--) {
      var counter = 0, prime = primes[i];
      while (n % prime === 0) {
        counter++;
        n = n / prime;
      }
      if (counter > 0) factors[prime] = counter;
    }
    factors[n] = 1;
    return factors;
  }

  return {
    factor: factor
  }
})();

Factor.factor(3);
// Object {1: 1, 3: 1}

Factor.factor(6);
// Object {1: 1, 2: 1, 3: 1}
{% endhighlight %}

#### Least Common Multiple

{% highlight Javascript %}
/**
 * Creates an array of positive numbers progressing from `start` to `end` inclusive.
 *
 * @param {number} start The start of the range.
 * @param {number} end The end of the range.
 * @returns {Array} Returns the new array of numbers.
 */
function range(start, end) {
  var c = end - start + 1,
      arr = Array(c);
  while ( c-- ) {
    arr[c] = end--
  }
  return arr;
}

function lcm(ns) {
  var common = Object.create(null),
      lcm = 1,
      factors = ns.map(function(n) { return Factor.factor(n); });

  // For each numbers' factors add and update if degree is higher than current.
  for (var i = 1, len = factors.length; i < len; i++) {
    for (var factor in factors[i]) {
      var degree = factors[i][factor];
      if (!common[factor] || common[factor] < degree) {
        common[factor] = degree;
      }
    }
  }
  // Multiply each factors to the power of degree.
  for (var factor in common) {
    lcm *= Math.pow(factor, common[factor]);
  }
  return lcm;
}
timer(lcm, 1, range(1, 10));
// lcm x 1: 0.069ms
// 2520

function euler5() {
  return lcm(range(1,20));
}
timer(euler5);
// euler5 x 1: 0.111ms
// 232792560
{% endhighlight %}
